25 March

As always before an early start, I had a disturbed night. At 5:10 I mis-read
my watch, thinking it was 5:30. As a result I was able to get dressed and 
finish last-minute packing in a relaxed way. When the call came at 5:45, I
went down to check out. The girl asked if I wanted her to call the taxi to
ask it to come now instead of waiting until 6. Why not? I had only time to
fill in three numbers in the USA Today sudoku before it arrived. By just
after 6 I was at the airport.

There was a huge queue for Delta, and first time along I missed the American
check-in. It was much shorter, but moving quite slowly. A flight had been
cancelled and passengers were being re-booked; passengers on flights whose
departure was imminent were being called to the front. But after an hour I 
was through, checked in to London, and on to the next stage. Seccurity was
also slow-moving, and took half an hour; I arrived at the gate only ten
minutes before it was due to open.

It was a pleasant flight to Chicago. We pushed back from the gate right on time
and were soon airborne. After views over suburban housing, and a short bit of
bumping, we were above a beautiful carpet of clouds, with some big cumulus for
variety. This lasted all the way to Chicago. The stewardess brought drinks
(free) and snacks (not cheap); I had a coffee. She also knew the gate number
of my flight to London.

We arrived fifteen minutes early. No need to change terminals this time, but
it is a very big terminal, and I had quite a long walk; but no need to go
through security again. I was at the gate in very good time. Several other
people on my flight were making the same connection. The plane was going to
be very crowded.

But we started boarding in good time, and pushed back only five minutes late;
the passengers were aboard but we had to wait for the baggage. I am a long way
back (I was boarded in the first group), and it is like a time warp: no
individual screens, no free headphones, terribly cramped. I have revised my
opinion of American Airlines downward.

"Breakfast" came well after 4pm London time, and did at least include a bottle
of water and a goody-bag of snacks. I finished the puzzles in the in-flight
magazine and read for a bit.

The afternoon and evening drew on. Dinner came: a badly-cooked pizza and a
boring salad. I finished one book and started another. The occasional glimpse
of our progress on the screens showed that we were running about a quarter of
an hour late. But eventually it was over, and we were on the ground in London.

A very long walk to passport control. Fortunately there the queue was moving
quite fast and I was not long detained. The immigration officer was very 
friendly; he said that he tried to persuade his children that mathematics 
underlies everything and they should take an interest, and he warned me that
getting a stamp in my new passport would cost a thousand pounds.

Given the lateness of the hour, I decided to go on the Heathrow Express. Better
eighteen pounds to them than 50 to a taxi! By great good fortune, I caught the
last train; it came in on platform 10 and I was near the back, and as I ran up
the stairs and down the stairs to the underground, a Barking train was just
pulling in.

