23 March

I woke with a burning feeling in my throat. Is it a cold coming on, or just
the hotel atmosphere? Who knows? Anyway, after breakfast I felt more or less
OK. I breakfasted with Cheryl and John again, and after breakfast we met up
and walked in together. 

It was considerably colder than yesterday; I wished I had wrapped up more
warmly.

We had Gyorgy Turan talking about algorithms for Horn formulae (popular in
artificial intelligence, it seems); Cheryl, on the great improvements she
and Akos have made to the analysis of the black-box recognition algorithm
for general linear groups (depending on some nice enumerative results for
semi-simple elements); and Harald Helfgott on growth for small subsets of
groups (i.e. showing that if A is a not-too-large subset of a group of Lie
type, then A^3 is substantially larger than A; he did assume a bit too much
of his audience, I thought). In his talk I found out what has happened to
Nick Gill: he is now Harald's postdoc.

At coffee, I had a chat to Ian Leary, who works here now. (I later saw his
photo on the faculty board.) Afterwards I began showing my age, nodding off
in the talks by Miklos Abert (who had little respect for his audience) and
Madhu Sudan (who was a bit slick). Sudan's talk was how you recognise that
a map between groups is close to being a homomorphism; I tried to imagine
a situation where you would be given a map which was close to but not a
homomorphism, how it would be defined, but gave up and closed my eyes.

I decided that I would skip lunch; large plates of greasy food no longer suit
me. Probably this is why I am sleepy. So I logged on and read my email,
including a letter from the Principal which didn't actually say very much,
and tracked down a Bertrand Russell quote that John had reminded me of this
morning. Through all this, the white toy connected flawlessly to the wireless
network and everything worked without a hitch.

I had to meet Akos before the afteroon to sort out expenses. The front door
of the main building was open, so I went in. What you are not allowed to do
in the building is smoke, cycle or carry a gun. Apart from the fact that
Akos had far too much bureaucracy to do, it all went fine; I got on well 
with the secretary, and the business was done quite quickly.

After lunch, Gabor Lippner gave a much clearer explanation of graph limits
than Miklos Abert had done. Then Igor Pak gave a rather odd talk, ending up
with a little rant to the effect that combinatorial enumerators want an exact
result to a counting problem, but computer scientists think an approximate
result is more exciting. He had earlier explained that these were his two
hats, and showed a picture of a white and a black cowboy hat; but he didn't
actually say which of the two was the good guy, though I got the impression
he thought it was the computer scientist.

Then I swapped rooms to hear Steven Butler talking about joint work with Ron
Graham on a variant of shuffling, and then Csaba talking about solving
equations in groups (a bit uncompromising). Finally, after coffee, Avi
Wigderson talked about Cayley graphs as expanders. I think he explained the
basic theory less clearly than I recently explained it to Alex O'Neill. The
talk was full of imprecision, and was all done in Comic Sans (I think), where
the variable x was completely indistinguishable from a multiplication sign,
and he had to use a "proportional" sign to simulate the semi-direct product
symbol. Lots of very good arguments for not doing mathematics in sans serif
fonts!

There was a party at 8pm in the common room. Robert and I headed off for
an oriental restaurant he had found the day before. We ended up leading a
crocodile of six people. The restaurant was a bit of a shock: the food was
nothing special, and the television was playing an absurd cartoon quite
loudly. (What teenager would agree to the proposition that "cool is in the
genes"? It would mean admitting that their parents were cool!)

Then back to the party. Akos had rounded up several students and collaborators
of Laci's to talk about him, and Laci responded with a long speech in narrative
mode. I was glad that he mentioned the BCP paper as one of the highlights.
Then we had cake, and the promise of champagne; but things had gone on rather
long, and I had a talk to prepare, so I skipped the champagne and took the
first bus home. On checking my talk, I found an annoying misprint; but it
was no trouble to edit and recompile the file in London and fetch it back
to the white toy.

