22 March

I slept well but woke up about 5, thinking about nice presentations of
homogeneous structures. Raindrops were streaming down the window. 
Eventually I decided to get up and type up my thoughts, and email them
to Laci and Csaba. I found that it wasn't even necessary to log in; the
system remembered me from last night.

When I had finished, I had breakfast. I was joined by Chris Godsil who had
just finished. Our conversation drifted to such dreary topics as research
assessments, lists of approved journals, and so on. Fortnately we were
rescued by the appearance of Cheryl, but she had brought bad news: her
part of Perth had just been hit by a cracker storm which had caused
enormous damage.

After breakfast the rain had stopped but it was still cloudy and cold.
I set off a little after 8 to walk to the University, not knowing how far it
was. I was taking a photograph when up came Cheryl and John. It turned out to
be about a 3/4 hour walk altogether; at one point when we were crossing
against the lights, John remarked on the damage that would be done to
permutation group theory if we had all been wiped out.

Another day of extraordinary talks. Satya Lokam talking about matrix rigidity
(I knew the basics of this since Taoyang had got interested in it at one point
and we had discussed it); Lajos Ronyai on polynomials and Grobner bases,
unfortunately much too fast but he ended up with a generalisation of the
Frankl--Wilson intersection theorem from primes to prime powers; then an
absolutely barnstorming talk by Gene Luks. He told a story, new to me, of the 
time when Babai had shown him a letter I had written giving bounds for orders
of primitive groups using CFSG. Laci had left to take a bus to New York and
a plane to Hungary; Gene had phoned the New York Port Authority to get them
to put out a call for Laci to call him, to verify that the theorem really 
did say what he remembered it saying.

I took the 105 stairs up to the common room. After coffee we had Eva Tardos
on adword auctions. These are how they determine the price of "sponsored links"
on Google pages etc. The basic assumptions seemed rather remote to me since I
never click on these, and even if I did, I am sure I would avoid the top one
(which is the most desirable). Then Alex Lubotzky told the story of the small
and short presentations, which I heard from Bill Kantor in Banff last year.

I went back to the same place for lunch and was joined by John, who like me is
averse to new experiences. I saw Robert outside the lecture room; he
wanted me to think about the metric dimension of dual polar spaces. I said
a few rather muddled things, but afterwards thought about it a bit more
sensibly, and found that I could remove the log factor from Babai's upper
bound but no more. Not really worth doing.

After lunch, Bill Kantor told the same story Alex had told, from a slightly
different point of view; then Bob Beals talked about polynomial-time matrix
group computation. One thing that happened in the session was that my 
suggestion to Laci, that speakers put their slides on a web page, has been
taken up, and we have been asked to mail our slides to the conference address.

Two talks not quite up to standard, and then Laci's talk. It was a talk with
the Erdosian title "Some of my favourite problems". He wrote on the blackboard
so that the problems would remain visible. The first problem was whether the
number of self-normalising subgroups of a group of order n is at most n^c.
He promised to come back and tell us why he wanted to know this but never did.
The remainder was an assortment of problems about inmprovements to the
Frankl-Wilson bound, graph spectra, vertex-transitive graphs, polynomials
with coefficients 0 and 1, etc.

At various points during the day I had run into Ron Solomon and Neil
Robertson, both of whom have threatened to come to my talk.

I walked to the bus stop with Robert and then walked back to the hotel. While
I was waiting, Csaba and his students came by and suggested we go to dinner
and talk about homogeneous structures.

We went to a pub/microbrewery very near the hotel and had a pub meal and a
few pitchers of beer - Csaba is still as good as ever in that respect. We
had a very good conversation about many aspects of homogeneous structures
and many related things. Finally we went back to the hotel. I flopped down
and was asleep almost immediately.

