21 March

I was woken at 5am by some people talking and laughing very loudly. They
sounded as if they were just outside my door, but it may just be that the
hotel is not very well soundproofed. Finally they were quiet, and I went
straight back to sleep, dragging myself awake with some difficulty at 7am.
I took a leisurely bath and got to breakfast at about 7:30.

I was sufficiently dozy that I had great difficulty finding where anything
was, but after a cup of coffee I became a bit more aware of my surroundings.
I was greeted by Csaba Szabo (who I didn't recognise at first, that is how
out of it I was), and breakfasted with him and two of his students. Then
Jarik showed up, so after the Hungarians went I had another cup of coffee
with him.

The hotel desk provided me with toothpaste, and sewing kit (to mend my
torn bag). Since it is Sunday, with not too many buses, they had put on
two special buses for us; I made it downstairs in time to catch the second
of these, and found myself next to John Dixon.

At the conference I checked in and got username and password for the
university's guest network. Then it was time for the lectures.

There were two parallel sessions in the afternoon but only a single session
in the morning. And what a splendid collection of talks I heard! Ron Graham,
as fresh as ever despite his hard day's travelling and late night, on some
beautiful new combinatorics of permutations (involving both descents, defined
as usual, and drops, which are numbers which are mapped to smaller numbers).
Then we had Anna Gal on 3-query locally decodable codes (a new branch of
coding theory for me, clearly inspired by Laci Babai's ideas), and Subhash
Khot, on "Grothendieck inequalities" for arbitrary sets of vectors, reminiscent
of (but quite different from) some of Aidan's work.

After coffee, where we needed a bit of intelligence to find the way (it was
in a different building all of whose outside doors were locked, but there
was an internal entrance from the conference building), we had John Dixon
on finding representations close to approximate representations (an old
question of Ulam, which in other guise involves lifting representations
from characteristic p to characteristic 0), and Bojan Mohar (quantifying
Babai's structure theorem for large vertex-transitive graphs).

For lunch we walked towards the high street and found an open sandwich bar
("sandwich" meaning something covered in molten cheese). Nearby there was a
bank with the intriguing title of "Fifth Third Bank", which suggests that
five times the economy has grown enough to support three banks, and in each
of the first four it crashed back again.

After lunch, I decided to stay in one room the whole afternoon; the talks
there looked slightly less technical and more expository. It was a great
collection of talks once again: Zoran Sunic using the Towers of Hanoi to
construct the first example of a branch group having the infinite dihedral
group as a quotient; Delaram Kahrboaei on public key exchange systems based
on non-abelian groups; Gabor Hetyei who gave a wonderful talk explaining my
observation on the relation between John Dixon's formula for the number of
pairs of permutations generating a transitive subgroup with the number of
connected permutations (via the notion of "Bernoulli games"); Tom Hayes on
why "stirring" can make a Markov chain converge faster; Gabriella Pluhar on
the maximum number of "islands" in rectangular or triangular grids (these
are families of rectangles or triangles such that for any two, either one
contains the other, or they are disjoint and don't touch); Daniel Stefankovic
on a variant of the rank generating function (where, instead of the matroid
rank of the graph formed by a given edge set, you put the mod 2 rank of its
adjacency matrix), which has specialisations counting matchings, perfect
matchings, and (in the case of a bipartite graph) independent sets.

At tea Cheryl told me that she has had referees' reports on the counting book,
mostly favourable, which she will send me soon.

After the talks were finished, Laci wanted to talk about a paper we should
write. He has observed that the methods we both used ages ago to prove that
almost all Latin squares have no non-trivial automorphisms also show that for
almost all normalised Latin squares the rows generate the symmetric or 
alternating group (and so, by Haggkvist and Janssen, actually the symmetric
group). I had arranged to go to dinner with Csaba and his students to talk
to them about infinite permutation groups; Laci and John decided to come
too.

We went to a Greek restaurant, where we had a decent meal and a lot of good
mathematical discussion (as well as a lot of talk about Tom Lehrer etc.).
The only down side is that they appeared to add 20% service charge, which
seemed a trifle excessive. I will have to find a hole-in-the-wall sometime
soon!

Back in the room I tried out the internet connection. No luck. But a phone
call to the desk established that they change the password every week on
Sunday; with the new password it all worked flawlessly. So I copied yesterday's
diary to London and read my email, before writing up today's and going to
bed.

