24 March

I slept later this morning. Checking my email I found that Bhalchandra Thatte
had at last sent a title and abstract, so I had to post these in two places
on the web. After breakfast I went down and found Bob Beals ready to walk,
but he suggested waiting for Cheryl, who came along with John soon after.

On the way I talked to Bob about the construction of the sporadic simple
groups. He feels, and I agree, that someone should document this in a more
detailed way than either Mark Ronan or Marcus du Sauty have done, not being
afraid to talk about the mathematics. He felt from my comments that the
people who actually did the computing are being written out of the script.
For a simple example, the groups that were called HHM, HJM, and LyS are now
called He, J_3, and Ly. He said that Joe Gallian has gathered some material
about this. He also talked about NSA, GCHQ, etc., where he has worked, and
even told me a non-classified story about something that happened in GCHQ (but
was unable to tell me the mathematical result of the computation).

It was a beautiful sunny morning, much warmer than previously, and showing
the beginnings of blossom on the trees.

The first three talks, by Lance Fortnow, Chris Godsil and Scott Aaronson,
were all very good. Lance confused his audience, who all understood the
acronym PCP, by using the word "begat", which several people didn't know.
(Later in the day, Paul Schupp talked about Garden of Eden patterns, those
which do not arise from any transition.) His talk wa about Arthur-Merlin
and related complexity classes. I didn't know that, if graph isomorphism is
in P, then PH collapses.

Chris talked about some quantum things related to graphs: perfect state
transfer, walk-equivalence, controllable graphs (a stronger condition than
having trivial automorphism group). Of course he went very fast; I would need
to see the slides at leisure. Scott Aaronson talked about quantum versions of
Arthur-Merlin-type protocols.

During these talks, I decided that I should put at least a little bit of
complexity in my talk; so in the coffee break I wrote a couple of frames on
testing for, or finding, fixed-point-free elements in permutation groups.
The latter is easily shown to be in RP for a transitive group, but the proof
that it is in P requires the Classification. The white toy performed
flawlessly, and I had compiled the file and fetched it over just before the
start of Sasha Razborov's talk.

He talked about a subject which got a lot of airing today, expansion properties
of subsets of a group. He showed that, for free groups, all the difficulty is
in the abelian case: a finite subset A of a free group which is not contained
in a cyclic subgroup satisfies |A^3| >= |A|^2/(log |A|)^c. He also showed that
this is essentially best possible, and explained more clearly than anyone else
why in a nonabelian group we have to use A^3 rather than A^2.

Then it was my talk. I talked a little about working with Laci, then went
through my fixed-point-free example. This meant I was a little short of time
for the main stuff, and went a bit fast at the end, but the whole lecture went
over well; I think different people appreciated different parts of the lecture
(always a good sign).

Robert and I went off to lunch talking about metric dimension. We ended up
back in the same place I'd gone to the first two days. I had a chicken salad
sandwich, but it still comes with greasy melted cheese. I do like the 
advertising slogan they use for their lemonade. After they explain that they
squeeze real lemons, they say, "Why do we use real lemons? Well, fake lemons
don't grow on trees, you know!"

The afternoon also brought some very nice talks. Gabor Ivanyos talked about
finding a matrix of maximal rank in a subspace of the space of m-by-n
matrices, and its relation to module isomorphism. After his talk, Laci got
to his feet and gave a not-too-short appreciation of Gabor. Apparently, among
his achievements, he has given a test for the completeness of a set of quantum
gates, using the Classification of Finite Simple Groups (if I understood it
right). Martin Kassabov talked about expansion properties in Coxeter groups.
a beautiful theorem with lots of geometric content, clearly the right way to
go about it. Paul Schupp talked about cellular automata (like Conway's Game of
Life) on arbitrary Cayley graphs, whose properties are closely related to
things like amenability of the group. Finally Robert Bailey talked about metric
dimension, and did a good job.

I was a bit suspicious of one of his theorems, but didn't catch him during
coffee, after which Laci Pyber gave his talk. Another bit of history is being
re-written here: he has been described at this conference as the person who
proved that the number of groups of order p^n is p^{f(n)}, where f is a
polynomial. Of course a much more precise statement than this was proved by
Charles Sims and Graham Higman ages ago. What Laci has done (and this is 
no mean feat) is to get precise asymptotics, but ... His talk was on expansion
properties in groups of Lie type. Apparently, by coincidence, he and his
collaborator, and another team including Terry Tao and Ben Green, posted papers
on the arXiv within four hours of each other proving exactly the same theorem
(Laci's was first).

After the talk, I caught Robert, and we walked into town together. I persuaded
him that his theorem was wrong but could be patched (to give a weaker but still
good bound). We agreed to go to dinner and talk about it. While we were
walking, Cheryl caught us up. She has heard more about her house: many windows,
and possibly the whole roof, will need to be replaced. She doesn't get back
for another three weeks because of an IMU meeting. We invited her along to
dinner. Waiting in the lobby, of course several people asked if we were going
to dinner, and we picked up one more, Bob Beals. I thougt that if the worst
came to the worst, the other two could talk while Robert and I worked.

We tried the North Market, which had been recommended as full of good eating
places, only to find that it closed at 7, two minutes after we arrived. So
we went to a posh Italian restaurant just up the street. It was not ideal
for our purpose, since it was very crowded and the level of conversational
noise was deafening. So after a while Robert and I decided to finish our work
in the hotel, and we made general conversation after that. Cheryl and Robert
swapped stories of having to deal with nutters. Cheryl won the competition,
having once had to deal with a Vietnamese boat person whose parents had died
of thirst and been thrown overboard after pirates boarded the boat they were
escaping on. He reached Australia, and at one point, went looking for
acquaintances who, it turned out, had just left that address. He went into
the house. The owner returned and called the police. The police challenged him.
He decided that the incident had brought such shame on himself and his family
that he should commit suicide, so he drew a knife to slit his wrists, upon
which of course the police shot him through the shoulder. Cheryl had to go
bail for him, and this committed her to getting him to the court. A long
and quite horrific story altogether. We also got round to talking about Peter
Johnson, who now apparently is married and happily settled in Brazil.

The food was excellent, especially the bread pudding, one of the nicest I
have ever had, and I treated the others to a bottle of Snoqualmie syrah from
Washington State, very nice wine it was too.

Back to the hotel, Robert and I talked about dual polar spaces and got nowhere.
Then Laci Pyber came along. Robert had mentioned a paper of Liebeck,
Macpherson and Tent about small orbital diameter; I had said that Laci's
result was probably relevant to this. So we asked him: he knew the paper,
and yes, it was so.

It was getting late so I went to the desk to book a taxi and a wake-up call,
and then up to bed.

