20 March

I was up early, to breakfast, do a cursory cleaning of the house, and set off.
I was allowing a couple of extra hours to get to the airport. I called in at
work to pick up a copy of Laci's paper and read email one last time. No
major panics there.

Then I ambled down to Mile End to get the Central line, to find an 
unexpected delay: the station entrance was closed until 12:30. So back 
along the road to Stepney Green, where I got the Hammersmith and City line
to Liverpool Street, where I changed for the Central. Fortunately, an
Ealing Broadway train came in very soon after another train, so it wasn't
too crowded.

At Ealing Broadway, a station where I don't believe I have ever gone out to
the street, we were directed a fair hike down the road to the traffic lights
and along the crossing road. There was indeed a bus, nearly empty, but it
closed its doors and left almost as soon as I got on, before I had time to
sit down.

We came to a traffic lights onto a road absolutely choked with traffic. There
was a special lane for right turn, with just our bus in it; but the driver
had to let the first change of the lights go by, since a huge lorry had just
turned from the other direction and was blocking the traffic. It was a slow
crawl to the Chiswick roundabout, where we got onto the A4 to Brentford, where
I had walked last weekend. We had to turn right, which involved turning off,
doing a U-turn, and then turning left. But finally we got to Boston Manor,
where a Heathrow train came along very soon.

So in the end I was at the airport four hours before the flight left. Maybe
just as well. The man at the check-in desk said that the flight was very
crowded and I had no seat booked; he put me in an exit row seat. Then he
didn't like the photo on my passport, and phoned the security person, who
phoned the other security person, who finally gave it his OK. The man behind
the desk asked me if I wanted to upgrade, for four hundred pounds; I declined.
By a remarkable irony, when I got to the departure gate, I found that they
had upgraded me for nothing!

I went through security and into the departure lounge. I wanted to have a 
proper meal, since I have eaten nothing but sandwiches for some time; but
one restaurant was absurdly expensive and the other one crowded out, so it
was a sandwich anyway. I bought a couple of books.

At the gate, there was the most incredible security. They opened all my bags,
made me take off my shoes and undo my belt, and did a thorough body search.
(Once I was on the plane, they brought me a tray with two forks and three
knives, all metal.) But despite this, we were away virtually on time.

The big roomy seat was more comfortable, though I didn't explore all its
positions; they provided Bose noise-cancelling headphones, which do reduce
the engine noise considerably, and make it possible to listen at low volume,
or simply sit with engine noise much reduced, which is much more relaxing.
There was quite a decent meal, and I listened to some music and watched a
couple of movies. The choice was very limited; I saw "Where the wild things
are", which was under action, not children's (and indeed the monsters had
very adult-like hang-ups); and "Bright Star", a real weepie which left me
quite cold, and which managed to get the seasons on Hampstead Heath quite
confused (wild rose was out before bluebells, and they were worrying about
approaching winter while the beeches had just come out in leaf.)

We arrived in Chicago on time, as dark was falling. I had a friendly and
helpful immigration officer, and a customs officer who, after being amazed
at my lack of luggage, waved me straight through. The train to Terminal 3
was easy to find, and after another struggle with security (they seemed to
think it was my fault that I didn't know I had to take my shoes off and put 
the white toy in a separate tray) and a very very long walk, I was at the
departure gate with half an hour to spare.

Then the waiting began. The plane was out there waiting for us, but the rest
of the concourse was full of announcements of seriously delayed flights to
and from other places. (There was a lot of snow on the ground, and clearly 
there had been some very bad weather.) One of our flight crew was on a
delayed inbound flight, so we found ourselves waiting an indefinite time
until he arrived (which turned out to be over an hour). When they did let
us aboard, they decided the plane needed to be de-iced, and we had another
long wait for the de-icing truck.

While we were waiting, Ron Graham (sitting across the aisle from me) and I
noticed each other's existence and had a long conversation, about "Infinity",
reviews of mathematics, nice theorems and problems, etc. Poor Ron, who had
come from California, is due to give the first talk tomorrow).

Eventually we were on our way, and arrived in Columbus not much before 2am.
Ron's bag had gone on an earlier flight which he was bumped off, but
fortunately it was there waiting for him when we got out of the baggage
carousel area. He is staying on campus, so we took different taxis. It was
a 25 dollar ride but quite quick, and there was no problem at check-in.
So finally I got to bed after 2am.

