Thursday 18 March

Not a good day.

At lunch Leonard said to me that I would have a miserable time getting into
the USA, with fingerprints, retina scans, etc. Of course he is right. In the
afternoon, I had a bit of time after my lecture, so I printed out the address
of the hotel, the basic conference instructions, the e-ticket, etc. There
were two emails from Key Travel, more or less identical, but feeling a bit
paranoid I read through the fine print in the second as well as the first.
Just as well.

Down the bottom, a new regulation for people travelling to the USA on a visa
waiver, brought in this January. You have to pre-register at some website.
The process takes 72 hours. At the moment I read it, I had 48 hours before
takeoff, a bit more before arrival. But of course, I needed my passport to
fill in the form.

So I went home for my passport. Not in the usual place. Not in the second
most likely place. I thought the third most likely place was in my briefcase,
which I had taken to Lyon in November. (It is from the Tunisian conference;
Maurice Pouzet had been there, and had also brought his, which was how I
remembered I'd had it.) So back to work, since my briefcase was there. No
passport, not even in the secure zip-up compartment.

So home again to do a more thorough search: pockets of coats I might have 
been wearing, under various piles of paper that got shifted around at
Christmas. No luck on the first pass, but I went through again looking more
thoroughly, and finally found it. Some good was achieved: I found various 
other things such as the international adapter that had gone missing, some
luggage labels, etc.

So back to work to fill in the form. This asks the usual questions that are
on the I-94: street address where I will stay (which I'd already printed out,
of course), was I a member of the Nazi Party between 1933 and 1945 (unlikely
given my date of birth), etc. I filled it in, and submitteed it, and was
invited to check the status of my application. This brought the only bright
spot of the afternoon: my application was already accepted! No idea why they
say 72 hours -- just covering their backs I expect.

So, at last, I was off duty. (Apart from tidying up the mess I'd left!)

