Banff National Park, in the Canadian Rockies, is the oldest National Park in
Canada and third oldest in the world, including one of the most spectacular
stretches of the Rocky Mountains. The small town of Banff has diversified
away from being a ski resort, with the presence of the Banff Centre,
paradoxically on the outskirts of the town under Tunnel Mountain; this is
designed for meetings and masterclasses in the arts. (In fact, of the four
other people on the bus from Calgary airport with me, one was a trumpeter,
one a bookbinder, one a mixed-media artist, and one a six-year-old boy who
was a fan of Captain Underpants.) Tucked away on the edge of the Banff Centre
campus is a weatherboard building carrying the sign "Banff International
Research Station", which hosts week-long mathematics conferences. I was
lucky enough to visit this beautiful part of the world for a conference
in July 2009.

The programme of the conference left little time for serious walking.
Wednesday afternoon was free, and on Tuesday and Thursday there were
no lectures between lunch and tea; but no chance of a really long hike,
or to climb the 3000-metre Mt Rundle, which the editor of Strider had
recommended to me a month earlier. There were other problems with long
hikess too; some of the trails are closed in the summer because of
animals breeding; perhaps to save unwary tourists from bears, perhaps 
to spare the animals from disturbance, most likely both of these.

So I had to squeeze in what walking I could in gaps in the schedule.

On Monday after lunch, there was a bit over an hour before the conference
photograph. They laid on a campus tour, but I decided on something more
energetic, the trail up Tunnel Mountain. The path zig-zagged up the slope,
with fine views up two valleys, and a good display of harebells and purple
fleabane. From the top of the ridge, a sheer cliff fell down the other side,
and I was treated to long views down the valley, marred only by a golf course.
I was watching the clock to get back in time for the photo, and so had to
turn back just before the summit and hurry down.

On Tuesday there was an organised hike to the Hoodoos, a group of rock pillars
with some resemblance to the Three Sisters near Sydney. Although it was my
first visit to Banff, I somehow got appointed as walk leader, maybe because
I had a map and some idea how to read it, and could find a web page
describing the walk with my netbook. But there was a pall over the whole
company, since we had just learned of the death of a colleague in Los Angeles.
He had started out on a hike with a companion; at a certain point he had
felt unwell and sent his companion on; he was never seen alive again.

The path descended to the Bow River, a lovely spot with the cliffs of
Tunnel Mountain rising on one side and the vast Mt Rundle across the river
on the other. The clear stream ran swiftly over its rocky bed, around islands
and large rocks in the stream.

After a while we turned away from the river and started to climb. One member
of the party, Richard, lagged behind. I went back to see how he was; he said
he wasn't feeling too good; he would walk back down to the river and sit there
for a bit. My heart sank; it was clear that he didn't expect me to stay with
him, but what should I do? I decided in the end that lightning doesn't strike
twice, and went back to the rest of the party to continue. 

The Hoodoos themselves were a bit of an anticlimax. There was a viewing
platform just off the road high above, and no obvious way down; we didn't
have time to investigate the possibility of scrambling down for a closer
look. So we turned back. I was very relieved to see Richard sitting on a
seat in the shade outside the lecture room.

The next day was Wednesday, the free afternoon. After some debate it was
decided to go to Sunshine Village, a ski resort west of Banff.
Several cars would drive to the car park, then for $25 per head the party
would be transported up the mountain to the ski centre and would walk from
there.

Sunshine Village boasts of having snow for nine months of the year. In the
ski season, a gondola runs; but in summer, there is a retired school bus which
labours up the dusty gravel track, climbing 500 metres in a little over 5km.
I opted not to take the bus, but to walk on the Healy Pass trail, up a stream
valley a bit to the west. Having failed to persude others to come with me,
I set off alone. In all, I covered 21km, with 700 metres between the highest
and lowest point, in less than four hours, and was back at the car park right
on time.

The trail went up a steep stream valley, crossing the stream on a bridge
through pine foret and rising to an alpine meadow. I decided to take a little
detour to the start of the Simpson Pass trail which would bring me to Sunshine
Village. This involved quite a stiff climb. (Maps of the Rockies have contour
lines at 50 metre intervals, which can be deceptive for one used to OS maps.)
This brought me to a completely different terrain; flat, with boggy lakes
and bright wildflower meadows, with spectacular views of the surrounding
mountains. 

Just before I reached the open space, I had heard the noise of a helicopter
echoing from the surrounding mountains. I found a couple of park employees
building stepping stones across a small stream. I suspect the helicopter had
dropped them off for their afternoon assignment. A passing hiker stopped to
chat; just as he was complaining about the heat, a cooling breeze sprang up.

A steep descent brought me to the start of the Simpson Pass trail. After a
short climb, the trail ran below a crumbling cliff (on whose summit the
Alberta-BC provincial border ran). The cliff had shed masses of stone and
rubble, piled up along its base and almost extending to the path. After
the cliff, a short climb brought me to a pass. I thought the climb was over,
but not so.

After crossing a valley, the trail went very steeply up a ridge, round a cwm
where snow was lying in full sunlight. Finally I reached the top, from where
the path followed a ski run down to Sunshine Village, with masses more
wildflowers: Indian paintbrush, purple and yellow fleabane, and many more

From the ski centre, the only way down was the dusty road. After several cars
had passed, a water truck came past spraying the road (and, incidentally, me).
It made more dust than anything else; but afterwards, things were a bit better.
I arrived at the car park at precisely the meeting time, and after the bus
came we all drove back to Banff.

On Thursday, one of the organisers asked me to lead a gentle walk up Tunnel
Mountain, but he forgot to announce it, so only two of us set out. We had
mathematics to discuss, so didn't pay a lot of attention to the view. By
this time the air was quite hazy, the result of forest fires to the west of us.

Friday was the last day of the conference. We finished by lunchtime, but
my hopes of spending all afternoon walking were dashed when a colleague
wanted to talk about a paper we were writing and another problem she thought
might interest me. After our discussion she agreed to come for a walk, but
we had only three hours. I decided I should at least set foot on Mt RUndle,
even if there was now no hope of getting even to the top of the hiking trail.

The trail starts a stone's throw from the Banff Centre, across the Bow River
(which comes over the Bow Falls at this point), but there is only one bridge
over the river, so we had to walk into town to cross the bridge (seeing the
falls from the top of a cliff) and then return on the other side (seeing them
again from river level). Across a bridge over the tributary Spray River, past
the golf course, we found the start of the trail.

The mountain is shaped like a wedge of cheese; on one side it is a flat
sloping plane, while the other side is precipitous cliffs. The path went up
the flat side, virtually dead straight, through forest with wildflowers,
fungi, moss and juniper. We hoped to get above the treeline (which promised
spectacular views), but the clock beat us; I had to get back to catch the
limo to the airport. So we turned back and retraced our steps, past people
paddling in the clear water of the river, and back up the hill to the Banff
Centre.

A week with no single marathon walk, but I had managed to fit about 60km
of mountain walking into a week of very intense work. The trails were all
in exellent shape, the waymarking so good that it would have been impossible
to get lost. Would I go back if I had the chance? Would I?


