23 July 2009

At breakfast time, there were ripples of cloud in the sky behind Mt Rundle.
(The weather forecasts are divided about whether it will rain in the next
couple of days or not.) On the way back, I saw a dark grey mouse-like creature
with a short tail trying to pluck up courage to cross the path.

There were three morning talks: a lovely but fiercely technical talk by
Richard Weiss on constructing affine buildings; Gunter Malle on a variant
of the k(GV) problem; and Kay Magaard on maximal subgroups of rank 3 groups
whose permutation characters don't contain the rank 3 character. I was
a bit distracted in Kay's talk by trying to guess how long the chalk would
hover over the board before making a mark (and also by his talking about the
stabiliser of a non-singular point in the natural module for symplectic 
groups).

Jan asked me to lead the walk up Tunnel Mountain, but forgot to announce it.
I said I would show up at 1 and take anyone who turned up at that time.
Meanwhile Peter tried to refute my conjecture, but it turned out he hadn't
quite got what the conjecture says.

By lunchtime, the sky was quite hazy; there are forest fires west of us, in
BC, and just enough wind to blow the smoke over. Also clouds building up; a
storm not impossible.

Only one person showed up for the walk, namely Ben (though Andrea Lucchini
had walked up on his own; we met him coming down). The views were much less
impressive than on Monday, because of the increasing haze in the air. Ben
talked on about synchronization all the way up, but coming down the 
conversation turned to more general properties, and finally to producing
a public draft of the paper. Ben thinks it should be re-written to give
graphs a more prominent role (so my lecture was successful in one respect
at least).

We missed a turn on the way back and had to climb back up the road for some
distance, but were still back in plenty of time for tea. But it was so humid
that I needed a cool shower first.

The afternoon talks were all rather heavy on detail, though all very different,
and despite good intentions I found myself drifting off a couple of times.

By dinnertime, the sky was clouding over. Tatiana wants me to do another job
on the paper, rewrite the introduction; I have been putting it off but it has
to be done sometime. So after dinner I sat down and got on with it. As usual
in such a situation, I found that there was little to do on the introduction,
but there were other errors throughout the paper which needed fixing. By 9
I had done it all, sent it off, and earned myself a drink.

By now, clouds were rolling over, and thunder was echoing around the mountains,
but no rain and little wind, and it was very hot and humid. Even the heat
generated by the white toy had become oppressive. By the time I had finished
my beer, it hadn't changed much, but I made an embarrassing discovery. When
I opened the window (with some difficulty), I failed to see that it was a
double window; so I hadn't actually let any fresh air in after all. But 
even with the window open, it was still very stuffy. I had an early night:
tomorrow morning will be packing and check-in.

The storm was a squib - by the time I went to bed, there was a lovely pink
sunset light on the clouds in the west.

