21 July 2009

I slept better, though still woke a few times. I had been having evening
coffee to keep me awake until bedtime -- meals are very early here, dinner
5:30-7:30 -- but I think it is time to stop now.

Last night I read through the computer manual and found that there is free
wi-fi here. I tried it out and it worked fine, no login required. But this
morning it is not working.

I made my way to breakfast. It is quite chilly here in the morning, before
the sun gets over the mountains. People told me the food used to be quite
bad here, but it is excellent now. For breakfast, they have several sorts
of cereal, a range of milk including soy milk and yoghurt, chopped fruit
(melon, pineapple, etc.); cooked breakfast of bacon, sausage, ham, egg,
diced fried potato (with a discreet amount of spring onion in it), waffles
and tiny pancakes; muffins, bagels, a range of tea (Persi asked for Earl
Gray yesterday and an individual pot appeared) and coffee, and they encourage
you to take a piece of fruit when you leave.

After breakfast, I realised that I had made the reverse mistake with my
booking for the airport bus: coming out, I booked the bus two hours too
early; returning, two hours too late, so I would have missed my plane.
The wireless wasn't working so I logged on to the Sunray to change the
booking, which all went very smoothly and I got an acknowledgment almost
immediately. Then I spent half an hour on Tatiana's paper, and got it 
almost ready (but another email from her says she is still not happy).
This was very intense and concentrated work, and at the end I was exhausted.

We had three lovely morning talks: Martin Liebeck on triangle presentations
of simple groups of Lie type; Tom de Medts on a beautiful construction for
a locally finite tree with a vertex-transitive automorphism group in which
the stabiliser acts as any prescribed group on the neighbourhood of a vertex;
then Alex Lubotzky on short presentations of simple groups. He told the
story beautifully, leading the audience down all the blind alleys that he
and his collaborators had been trapped in. But it is a beautiful theorem!

In the interval, Cheryl gave everyone the news about Bob Liebler, as far 
as it is known.

Jan had arranged a hike to the Hoodoos after lunch, and expected me to be
the leader. On the white toy, in the lecture room, with the Wi-Fi now 
working, I was able to find a webpage which gave the distance as 5.1km
with a climb of 60 metres (one way), and a beautiful picture, which might
have persuaded some of the doubtful. After lunch, leaving was a terribly
slow business, as people kept disappearing, but fourteen of us finally set
off. One disappeared early on; I am not even sure who it was.

We took a nice path through the woods and down to the river. The scenery here
was very fine indeed, with the sheer cliff edge of Tunnel Mountain on our
left and Mt Rundle towering over us on our right across the rapidly-flowing
river with islands and backwaters. 

When we came to the first uphill, Richard Lyons slowed down. I went back to
see how he was; he said he was turning back because he didn't feel too good,
but would sit and watch the river for a while. After the news about Bob
Liebler, you can imagine what a shock this gave me. But lightning doesn't
strike twice, I told myself, and went on.

The trail climbed a bit, then levelled off through a nice bit of forest at
the foot of the Tunnel Mountain cliffs (the ones I had stood above yesterday).
Then it reached the road, and a map showed there was only a little over a
kilometre to go. When we got there, it was a bit of a disappointment; the
viewing platform was high above the rocks, and there seemed to be no way
down (not that we had time to go further anyway). We turned for home.

On the way back, all walked at different speeds; I took a bit of trouble 
ensuring that nobody was lost, but basically felt that they could look
after themselves now, so went on with Akos Seress. When we got back to the
Banff Centre, I was relieved to see Richard sitting on a seat in the shade
looking completely relaxed. He had had a bit of a cramp, and, knowing that
he was not very fit, had decided to play it safe. I had time for a relaxing
cool shower before the afternoon talks.

These were more intense and long-winded than before, and a lot of the
audience was not in good shape for them, especially when Yoav Segev insisted
on going substantially over time. Finally we finished and it was dinnertime.

I ate with Bill and Phyllis, but Bill was soon hijacked by Akos to talk about
mathematics. So I went back to Corbett Hall. A party was going off to look
at wildlife; they asked me but I declined, wanting to prepare my talk. Then
Jan came with a map, thinking about a walk. He hadn't noticed that, according
to his map, the starting point is inaccessible to cars (but there is a gondola
to take you there). It looks an attractive spot; I might be tempted to go
with them (especially since there are several ways to extend the walk with
extra bits).

After that, I went and got a beer, a dark Bigrock ale from Calgary, and sat
on the porch drinking it. I wrote up my diary, transferred my photos, and
read my email. Then I went back to  my room, and printed out the revised
Airporter booking. The schedule has been rearranged so that we finish at
coffee time on Friday morning. I wouldn't have been able to catch an earlier
plane, but I have all day to wait, so a chance to get a bit more hikinng in.

