Banff, Alberta, Canada, 19-24 July 2009

Banff, a small town in the Rocky Mountains, is the centre of the oldest
National Park in Canada (and third oldest in the world). On the outskirts
of the town, under Tunnel Mountain, is the Banff Centre, an arts centre
supported by the Alberta provincial government. Almost as an afterthought,
the centre includes BIRS (the Banff International Research Station for
Mathematical Discovery and Innovation) which runs week-long conferences on
the Oberwolfach model. In the period 19-24 July 2009, there was a meeting
on "Permutation Groups", my real mathematical subject, to which I was
invited (though because of being too busy at work, I hadn't been able to
get myself into the right frame of mind for the trip).

19 July 2009

Getting underway took several attempts since I first wanted to have the
limo schedule at Calgary to hand and then I realised I had forgotten my hat.

The District Line is not running east of Aldgate East, so I had a fair walk
on setting out. The sky was cloudy but the sun was shining as I walked down
through a very uncrowded Whitechapel. There was some wait for the tube,
but eventually it came and I got a seat.

When we emerged into the daylight again at Barons Court, it had been raining;
the tracks were wet. The second tube to come took me to Heathrow. Since I
had checked in online, I went to the departure gate. But the scanner wouldn't
read my boarding pass, so they sent me back downstairs to have another one
printed out. That, fortunately, worked OK.

I sat in the departure lounge and worked on a new chapter for my counting
notes (on permanents, SDRs, and Latin squares) until the gate was announced.
At the gate, they didn't like my passport; the picture was not printed with
waterproof ink, and has smudged from a bit of water getting into it in
Galway. (What a relief that I didn't spend a lot of money getting a UK
resident stamp put into it!) But they accepted my old passport as ID and
let me in.

The flight was late leaving. They announced that this was caused by delay to
the incoming plane, and that we would be boarding in five or ten minutes.
Fifteen minutes later they repeated this announcement, word for word. But
the second time it was actually correct. Then, when we were ready to go,
the pilot was told by air traffic control that there was a further fifteen
minutes' delay. We messed around on the tarmac for quite a long time, and
in the end were almost an hour late leaving. There is now almost no chance
of catching the limo; I should have booked a later one.

On taking off, there was a lot of turbulence, so they didn't turn off the
seat belt sign for quite a while. I listened to "Highway 61 revisited" for
a while, until lunch came. The flight data system is not working so I cannot
get updates on our position or even find out for sure how many hours Calgary
is behind London (I think it is seven).

After lunch and coffee, I got the white toy out and typed up the chapter I
have written. I am not sure yet how much to say about Falikman's proof of the
van der Waerden conjecture, so I have deferred that decision and written up
the rest.

Then I read for a while (travel diaries, then a book), and listened to
music, while time passed. None of the other music compared to Bob Dylan, so
after a while I went back to Highway 61. Just three tracks in, we were
interrupted by an announcement that we were 35 minutes from Calgary, the
ordeal almost over.

Coming down into Calgary, we went through some quite bad turbulence; they
were having a storm. (The runways were wet when we landed.) A passenger
a few rows in front of me was airsick, and the disagreeable smell spread
through the cabin. But finally we were down, just 35 minutes late. Customs
and immigration took only ten minutes.

I had a shock when I looked at the limo receipt; I had mistakenly booked
for 2:30 instead of 4:30. But the girl had adjusted the bookings and told
me everything was fine, I should come back to the desk five minutes before
departure, and I should go to the loo since it is a two-hour journey.

There were five of us on the minibus, all going to the Banff Centre. A family
of father, mother and six-year-old boy from Los Angeles, the parents doing
some art thing at the Banff festival; a girl frm Philadelphia who plays the
trumpet and is teaching some classes there; and me. The little boy reads a
series of comic books called "Captain Underpants", which the American girl
had heard of. We chatted for a while and then fell to sleeping or watching
the scenery.

Calgary is such a pleasant town. Set in saucer-like basins separated by
ridges, it sprawls a long way, the suburbs consisting of patches of identical
houses separated by wide expanses of mown grass which seems not to be used
for anything. The whole place has a raw look, with no mature trees. But from
the tops of the ridges we could get a glimpse of jagged mountains in the
distance. The only thing of note was a large bird of prey in the far distance.

Eventually we turned west on the highway and Calgary fell behind. At first
the ground was fairly flat with some cultivation. Then it became more
undulating, and very green, and cattle replaced crops. The undulations
became full-scale hills, with more trees (pine, and some with broad shiny
leaves), and steep gullies ran down. By th roadside were increasing numbers
of wildflowers, including some striking blue ones. All the time the mountains
were drawing nearer, until after an hour we reached them.

They were as rugged as they had looked from a distance, with craggy cliffs
riven by crevices, dangerous-looking scree slopes, and clear strata at
vetiginous angles or violently twisted. But we didn't have to
climb them; the road ran through a valley with a fast-flowing river and
an industrial town. The panorama of mountains changed as we proceeded; one
view of a mountain standing alone made us all catch our breath.

After another half hour we reached the entrance to the Banff National Park,
which has a lower speed limit on the highway. Signs warned of wildlife on the
highway, though we didn't see any. (Before the park, they had warned of
pedestrians on the highway.) Before long we turned off, drove through Banff
town (it has a "Swiss village") and round the back streets to the Banff
Centre, where the driver let us off.

I read my instructions, which hinted that I should be somewhere different
from the main reception. But I went in to reception anyway, and it was the
right place. I got my key, my room card, a map, and rather complicated
directions for getting to the building where I am staying (there is a large
building site between). Chipmunks (maybe) scampered away across a lawn as
I passed.

I dumped my bags in my room, found my way to the common room where my 
badge and computer account details were. But the notice said that the entry
code to the room had been emailed to me. Fortuately I had printed out this
email, so on my second try I got the badge and account.

Then I went over to dinner. They swipe your card at the door (it knows who
you are) and then you are in and take what you like. I took a bowl of soup
and found my way to the BIRS tables, and many old friends having dinner.
At the first table I reached, Persi invited me to sit down in a place 
which had just been vacated. Opposite him was Ben Steinberg, whom I met 
now for the first time, despite having exchanged many emails.

I ate and had a long conversation, first with Persi, then with Ben and Peter
Neumann, who came by. I am told it stays light very late here at this 
time of year, but thought I should try to sleep at some point before my 
body thinks it is morning and time to get up. (The time difference was, 
indeed, seven hours).

Coming out of the dining room, we saw a small elk with a fine set of antlers
eating the flowers in a flower pot outside the building.

Back home I tried the computer and found it worked; but I can't connect
the white toy, and can't find a USB port on the SUN terminal.

20 July 2009

I woke several times in the night, but had no trouble getting back to sleep.
Twice I heard trains rumbling past somewhere in the distance, whistling a
minor chord rather than the FAB chord (major third and tone) of the
Quebec trains.

Eventually I realised I was wide awake so I got up and read my email. I am
in an apartment with two rooms sharing a bathroom; I don't know who is in
the other one, but whoever it is made quite a lot of clattering round locking
and unlocking doors last night, and at one point there was a terrific crash.
A notice in my room says that the thermostat is in the neighbouring bedroom,
so presumably this is intended as a family apartment. Anyway, I showered
quite early to avoid conflict over the bathroom.

I went early to breakfast. The Banff Centre caters for a lot of arty things
(some of which the people on the bus yesterday were going to), with mathematics
as just the small change; and the huge new building will dwarf the rest of 
the site. But it made for some interesting photographs of the mountains
through tthe building work. At breakfast, I found Persi, John van Bon, and
Richard Weiss. Later Katrin Tent and Martin Ziegler came, then Bob Guralnick
and his wife who have just driven from Princeton. Other friends all around
on other tables. Very nice breakfast, though I was somewhat restrained.

After that, it was almost time for the opening of the conference. Brenda,
the BIRS person, told us a few things, including the fact that there is a
computer manual in our desk drawer. She also said that this is the first
week of good weather in Banff all year.

Gary Seitz gave the first talk, announcing his result with Martin Liebeck 
(long coming) about classes and centralisers of unipotent elements in 
algebraic groups. Then John Shareshian and Michael Aschbacher talked about 
finding a lattice which is not an interval in a subgroup lattice of any finite 
group. The classical candidate is the n-point line; Michael concentrated on 
this (and has reduced it to two problems about almost simple groups) while 
John seemed to prefer taking a slightly more complicated type of lattice.

At coffee time I discussed with Brenda the possibility of a walk around
Sulphur Mountain on the Sundance trail for the free afternoon. I do not
want to spend half the time in a car going to Lake Louise, which seems
to be the popular alternative.

At lunch I fell into a discussion with Persi and Ben, which after a while
came round to the order of the arguments in a wreath product, and hence to
actions on the left or the right. On the way to lunch, we had discussed the
little animals on the grass; Ben, the only Canadian resident present, was not
sure what they are: too big for chipmunks, and the wrong sort of tail for
squirrels. (Later it was suggested to me that they were marmots.)

After lunch they had put on a campus tour but I decided to go for a walk
instead. I decided to see how far up the Tunnel Mountain trail I could get
if I were to get back in time for the conference photo at 2.

The distant views were stunning, and there were quite a lot of wildflowers
too: harebells, purple and orange daisies, stonecrop, and a grey-leafed shrub
with yellow flowers, were the most common. I reached the ridge, which gives
astonishing views of the next bit of the river valley and the other side of
Mt Rundle. I had to turn back just before the summit, having had the best
part, I'm sure.

Before the photo, Brenda appeared with a map and some bad news: the Sundance
Trail is closed from April to October. I will have to find something else to
do: I am sure I want to do a serious walk!

The photo was taken by the IT person and was very quick and painless, and
then we had a lovely talk by Persi about his encounters with Gelfand pairs
with an appropriate story from probability or statistics to illustrate
each one, including a story from Piaget about how children learn the idea
of randomness. 

After tea we reassembled for the last three talks. Just before the first,
Bill Kantor gave me the news that Bob Liebler has just died, on a hike, it
seems. He didn't feel too good, and told his companion to go on ahead, and
was not seen alive after that.

The last three talks were a mixed bag; the one most interesting to me,
because of the project with Robert, was Akos Seress' talk about 
distinguishing number. Having done primitive groups completely, he is 
now doing what he calls "two-step imprimitive groups", but it is far 
from complete. I think Robert and I are absolved from the burden of 
trying to cover this  in the survey of bases that we are writing.
(Distinguishing number is relevant to calculating the base size of
a wreath product in the product action.)

When the talks ended,  I went back to my room to dump my things, and 
discovered who my mystery neighbour is; it is Tim Burness. At dinner I 
ate with Bill and Phyllis Kantor. Phyllis had walked to the Hoodoos (a
group of standing rocks down the river a little way) and thoroughly 
recommended it.

After dinner I went back to my room. I tried to look up Sundance Pass on 
Google but could find no information. I downloaded the conference photo, and 
also transferred my day's photos from the camera onto the white toy and
wrote up my diary. The computer manual tells me where the USB port is - in
a very inaccessible place where you need tiny fingers to get it in and out
and run the risk of dislodging the keyboard and mouse leads. So I uploaded
yesterday's diary and emailed it to Ro. There is a paper from Tatiana which
I have to read, and the conference photo is on the web.

Then I went out to sit on the porch. I wanted to think about my talk and
about a theorem of Ken Johnson that Persi quoted in his talk (that the 
permutation group generated by the left and right multiplications in a 
quasigroup is multiplicity-free), but soon Peter Neumann came by, and gradually
quite a large crowd accumulated and a couple of bottles of wine appeared.
We sat there until the mosquitoes drove us in. The others went to the
common room to continue, but I decided it was my bedtime.


21 July 2009

I slept better, though still woke a few times. I had been having evening
coffee to keep me awake until bedtime -- meals are very early here, dinner
5:30-7:30 -- but I think it is time to stop now.

Last night I read through the computer manual and found that there is free
wi-fi here. I tried it out and it worked fine, no login required. But this
morning it is not working.

I made my way to breakfast. It is quite chilly here in the morning, before
the sun gets over the mountains. People told me the food used to be quite
bad here, but it is excellent now. For breakfast, they have several sorts
of cereal, a range of milk including soy milk and yoghurt, chopped fruit
(melon, pineapple, etc.); cooked breakfast of bacon, sausage, ham, egg,
diced fried potato (with a discreet amount of spring onion in it), waffles
and tiny pancakes; muffins, bagels, a range of tea (Persi asked for Earl
Grey yesterday and an individual pot appeared) and coffee, and they 
encourage you to take a piece of fruit when you leave. You can even have 
an omelette cooked to order!

After breakfast, I realised that I had made the reverse mistake with my
booking for the airport bus: coming out, I booked the bus two hours too
early; returning, two hours too late, so I would have missed my plane.
The wireless wasn't working so I logged on to the SunRay to change the
booking, which all went very smoothly and I got an acknowledgment almost
immediately. Then I spent half an hour on Tatiana's paper, and got it 
almost ready (but another email from her says she is still not happy).
This was very intense and concentrated work, and at the end I was exhausted.

We had three lovely morning talks: Martin Liebeck on triangle presentations
of simple groups of Lie type; Tom de Medts on a beautiful construction for
a locally finite tree with a vertex-transitive automorphism group in which
the stabiliser acts as any prescribed group on the neighbourhood of a vertex;
then Alex Lubotzky on short presentations of simple groups. He told the
story beautifully, leading the audience down all the blind alleys that he
and his collaborators had been trapped in. But it is a beautiful theorem!

In the interval, Cheryl gave everyone the news about Bob Liebler, as far 
as it is known.

Jan had arranged a hike to the Hoodoos after lunch, and expected me to be
the leader. On the white toy, in the lecture room, with the Wi-Fi now 
working, I was able to find a webpage which gave the distance as 5.1km
with a climb of 60 metres (one way), and a beautiful picture, which might
have persuaded some of the doubtful. After lunch, leaving was a terribly
slow business, as people kept disappearing, but fourteen of us finally set
off. One disappeared early on; I am not even sure who it was.

We took a nice path through the woods and down to the river. The scenery here
was very fine indeed, with the sheer cliff edge of Tunnel Mountain on our
left and Mt Rundle towering over us on our right across the rapidly-flowing
river with islands and backwaters. 

When we came to the first uphill, Richard Lyons slowed down. I went back to
see how he was; he said he was turning back because he didn't feel too good,
but would sit and watch the river for a while. After the news about Bob
Liebler, you can imagine what a shock this gave me. But lightning doesn't
strike twice, I told myself, and went on.

The trail climbed a bit, then levelled off through a nice bit of forest at
the foot of the Tunnel Mountain cliffs (the ones I had stood above yesterday).
Then it reached the road, and a map showed there was only a little over a
kilometre to go. When we got there, it was a bit of a disappointment; the
viewing platform was high above the rocks, and there seemed to be no way
down (not that we had time to go further anyway). We turned for home.

On the way back, all walked at different speeds; I took a bit of trouble 
ensuring that nobody was lost, but basically felt that they could look
after themselves now, so went on with Akos Seress. When we got back to the
Banff Centre, I was relieved to see Richard sitting on a seat in the shade
looking completely relaxed. He had had a bit of a cramp, and, knowing that
he was not very fit, had decided to play it safe. I had time for a relaxing
cool shower before the afternoon talks.

These were more intense and long-winded than before, and a lot of the
audience was not in good shape for them, especially when Yoav Segev insisted
on going substantially over time. Finally we finished and it was dinnertime.

I ate with Bill and Phyllis, but Bill was soon hijacked by Akos to talk about
mathematics. So I went back to Corbett Hall. A party was going off to look
at wildlife; they asked me but I declined, wanting to prepare my talk. Then
Jan came with a map, thinking about a walk. He hadn't noticed that, according
to his map, the starting point is inaccessible to cars (but there is a gondola
to take you there). It looks an attractive spot; I might be tempted to go
with them (especially since there are several ways to extend the walk with
extra bits).

After that, I went and got a beer, a dark Bigrock ale from Calgary, and sat
on the porch drinking it. I wrote up my diary, transferred my photos, and
read my email. Then I went back to  my room, and printed out the revised
Airporter booking. The schedule has been rearranged so that we finish at
coffee time on Friday morning. I wouldn't have been able to catch an earlier
plane, but I have all day to wait, so a chance to get a bit more hiking.

22 July 2009

I slept much more soundly, and was a bit late for breakfast (partly because
I read my email and then found a very amusing account of Mayor's Question
Time on London Reconnections). Parts of my talk were running in my head
over breakfast. As usual I have too much material, but the bits that will
probably be cut are actually some of the most interesting, showing the
power of this approach.

I did take a little time to start writing an account, possibly destined
for Strider. There is a story to tell, given yesterday's business.

But then the drawback of having two rooms sharing a bathroom became clear;
my apartment-mate went in for a long session. I had to take a long walk to
the lecture building to clean my teeth!

My talk went very well. I had 45 minutes, so I had to prune ruthlessly; but
I managed to tell a story, make propaganda for both monoids and graphs, 
and I even got a cheer from Persi when I said that we have to solve some 
problems even if they are NP-hard. Afterwards there were a couple of 
interesting suggestions from various people including Peter Neumann, who 
made the conjecture that any primitive group and any non-uniform map generate a
synchronizing monoid, and also suggested a possible source of affine examples.

Then Rob Wilson talked about his construction of the large Ree groups. Lovely
stuff, and he makes it all look so easy. At the end, several members of the
audience came out as secret Ree-group constructors. After the break, Pham
Tiep talked about the problem of classifying representations which remain
irreducible on restriction to a proper subgroup.

Jan announced that the walk would involve driving to the bottom of the
road up to Sunshine Village and catching the bus up the hill, at a cost
of 25 dollars per person. I said I would come but reserved the right not
to go on the bus. Ruth was good enough to make me a copy of the map. I
tried gently to persuade someone to come with me, but failed (maybe just
as well - I ended up walking 21km in less than four hours, with 700m 
difference between the highest and lowest point).

We were divided up among the available cars (Peter and Sylvia Neumann took
Simon Blackburn and me) and drove down the highway a bit and then off a side
road up a little valley to the huge car park and gondola station. (Sunshine
Village exists for skiing; it claims to have snow for nine months of the
year.) On the way we passed a big herd of wild goats. They were still there
when we returned home; I noticed that some of them were licking the road 
surface in a small lay-by; presumably they salt the roads in winter and
some of the salt stays there.

At the car park, where the bus (a retired school bus, rather battered)
was waiting, I went into the little shop in search of information, and
picked up a leaflet about the wildflowers. There was also a notice on a
board about "grizzly activity" reported in Healy and Simpson passes. This
was not to scare people off, rather the reverse; you were encouraged to 
join an expedition to see the grizzlies. In the event, I saw no sign of
any bears, but on the way down the dusty road I did meet two people with 
bells on their boots to scare the bears away.

The others got into the bus and set off; I found the trail and headed
off along it. At first we went in almost the same direction, the trail 
just below the dusty gravel road - the bus driver told the party that 
sooner or later I would have to scramble up to the road. But the path 
along Healy Creek soon turned off while the road switchbacked up the 
hill.

It was a lovely forest path with a huge cliff rising on the other side of the
valley. Wildflowers grew beside the path, most of which I was able to
identify from the leaflet, but a very common one with four curved and pointed
petals was not listed - later I looked it up and found it to be bunchberry.
The path climbed and crossed a lovely clear stream. A young hiker was sitting
by the stream and explained to me that he had got ahead of his party. Sure
enough, I soon found a large group of kids, and told the adult that I had
seen one of his group.

After a while the path levelled off in an alpine meadow with a discreet 
camping site and a food cache (both clearly signposted). I had decided to
take a slightly less direct route to the start of the Simpson Pass trail;
it turned out to involve a much stiffer climb. (The contour lines on maps 
of the Rockies are at 50 metre intervals, so the maps can be a bit misleading
at first glance.) Nearing the top, I heard the noise of a helicopter echoing
from the surrounding mountains; just as I stepped out from the trees, it was
flying away.

I was now in competely different country, a flatter area with boggy lakes
and stunning views of the mountains and a different selection of 
wildflowers. Soon I came to a couple of young people by a stream; they 
turned out to be park workers putting in stepping stones. It is possible 
that the helicopter was dropping them off for their afternoon's work. 
Then I met a hiker who stopped to talk. Just as he complained about the 
heat, a cooling breeze sprang up.

A very steep descent brought me to an open valley and the start of the Simpson
Pass trail. After a short climb, the trail came to the bottom of a huge
crumbling cliff, which had spilt a huge pile of stones and rubble along its
base, stretching out nearly to the trail in places. From the map I saw that
the Alberta-BC border runs along the top of the cliff; presumably, like the
Queensland-NSW border, the surveyors were told to follow the top of the ridge.

At the end of the ridge, the path climbed gently to a pass, and I thought I
was over, but not so. It crossed a valley and climbed the other side, with
the steepest climb of the whole walk. Just before the real summit, it went
round a cwm in which snow was lying in full sunlight (but on the shady side,
so presumably only in sun for a few hours a day.) The top brought a view of
a chain of huge bare mountains rising to almost 3000m. As I walked down the
other side, a cloud shadow crossed one of the mountain flanks like a giant
butterfly. The wildflowers here were the best yet.

The path led down a ski run to Sunshine Village, with one barn-like
accommodation block and the top of the gondola and the bottoms of a couple
of chairlifts. I headed down the dusty road with spectacular views of
mountains all around. Several cars came by kicking up the dust, then a water
truck spraying the road (and me). It made more dust than any of the others,
but afterwards things were not so bad. The road went on down; I could see
the trail I had taken earlier; and on the dot of 5:45, the scheduled meeting
time, I walked into the car park. The bar was closed, but I had a bottle of
water left, so I drank that, while checking the wildflowers. Among other things
I had seen lots of Indian paintbrush, purple fleabane (the orange and purple
daisies), glacier lily (well past its best), alpine forget-me-not, white
dryad, white globe flower, heart-leaf arnica, yellow fleabane, heather,
common stonecrop, and wild strawberry (no fruit yet, sadly).

There had been relatively few birds. Apart from some unidentified small ones,
I had only seen a raven with something in its beak. But there were birds in
the trees, making a lovely melodious whistling, in some places.

Soon the bus arrived, and we got into cars for the trip back.

Most of the others went to have showers, but I decided to eat first, since we
were on that side of the campus. After dinner, I soaked for a while; I am
remarkably un-stiff after quite a demanding walk. Then I took a beer and went
and sat on the porch. After a while Peter joined me, and then Ben, and the
talk fell to synchronization. On the walk I had checked Peter's affine
construction and found an even better variant (which he must really have
known about); and I trumped his conjecture about non-uniform maps always
synchronizing a primitive group with an even stronger conjecture that the
only maps that don't synchronize are maps onto the core of some G-invariant
graph.

While we were sitting there, an elk came and sat down under a tree, allowing
all the passers-by to inspect it. Jan, Ruth and Sylvia decided to jump into
a car and drive off to Lake Minnewanka where a moose had been seen yesterday.
(They didn't see it, but they saw a very fine sunset.)

Once the mosquitoes started biting, we went in to the common room, and tried
(ineffectively) to prove one or other of these conjectures. By 10:30 we 
were all tired and went to bed to sleep on them instead.

23 July 2009

At breakfast time, there were ripples of cloud in the sky behind Mt Rundle.
(The weather forecasts are divided about whether it will rain in the next
couple of days or not.) On the way back, I saw a dark grey mouse-like creature
with a short tail trying to pluck up courage to cross the path.

There were three morning talks: a lovely but fiercely technical talk by
Richard Weiss on constructing affine buildings; Gunter Malle on a variant
of the k(GV) problem; and Kay Magaard on maximal subgroups of rank 3 groups
whose permutation characters don't contain the rank 3 character. I was
a bit distracted in Kay's talk by trying to guess how long the chalk would
hover over the board before making a mark (and also by his talking about the
stabiliser of a non-singular point in the natural module for symplectic 
groups).

Jan asked me to lead the walk up Tunnel Mountain, but forgot to announce it.
I said I would show up at 1 and take anyone who turned up at that time.
Meanwhile Peter tried to refute my conjecture, but it turned out he hadn't
quite got what the conjecture says.

By lunchtime, the sky was quite hazy; there are forest fires west of us, in
BC, and just enough wind to blow the smoke over. Also clouds building up; a
storm not impossible.

Only one person showed up for the walk, namely Ben (though Andrea Lucchini
had walked up on his own; we met him coming down). The views were much less
impressive than on Monday, because of the increasing haze in the air. Ben
talked on about synchronization all the way up, but coming down the 
conversation turned to more general properties, and finally to producing
a public draft of the paper. Ben thinks it should be re-written to give
graphs a more prominent role (so my lecture was successful in one respect
at least).

We missed a turn on the way back and had to climb back up the road for some
distance, but were still back in plenty of time for tea. But it was so humid
that I needed a cool shower first.

The afternoon talks were all rather heavy on detail, though all very different,
and despite good intentions I found myself drifting off a couple of times.

By dinnertime, the sky was clouding over. Tatiana wants me to do another job
on the paper, rewrite the introduction; I have been putting it off but it has
to be done sometime. So after dinner I sat down and got on with it. As usual
in such a situation, I found that there was little to do on the introduction,
but there were other errors throughout the paper which needed fixing. By 9
I had done it all, sent it off, and earned myself a drink.

By now, clouds were rolling over, and thunder was echoing around the mountains,
but no rain and little wind, and it was very hot and humid. Even the heat
generated by the white toy had become oppressive. By the time I had finished
my beer, it hadn't changed much, but I made an embarrassing discovery. When
I had opened the window (with some difficulty), I failed to see that it was a
double window; so I hadn't actually let any fresh air in after all. But 
even with the window open, it was still very stuffy. I had an early night:
tomorrow morning will be packing and check-in.

The storm was a squib - by the time I went to bed, there was a lovely pink
sunset light on the clouds in the west.

24 July 2009

I woke up and did the first job (checking in) before breakfast. It was
simple enough: find Air Canada with Google, go to "check-in", type in my
booking number, tick a few boxes, hit "print". Then I had to get dressed
to go next door to the reading room to pick up the boarding pass from
the printer.

I heard a rather worrying story from Katrin Tent at breakfast, concerning
the LMS. She has had three papers recently mutilated by copy-editors. In
one case, they had added her husband's name as an author on the paper;
and they had preceded a list of conditions by the phrase "The following
conditions are equivalent:". Yesterday, walking up Tunnel Mountain, Ben
had told me a similar (but not quite so drastic) tale. Should I write
to Kenneth Falconer about it?

At breakfast, I realised that I would be back in Britain in 24 hours if
nothing went wrong. There were light clouds in the sky. Coming back, I
met Cheryl, who wants to talk about the paper this afternoon - there goes
my chance for a last walk.

I finished my packing and went over to the lecture room. The conference
finished with two absolutely splendid talks by Ben Steinberg and Peter
Neumann, and then Persi thanked the organisers. He said that he had heard
many people saying this was one of the best conferences ever. As far as I
am concerned, it had a very high proportion of excellent talks, and a very
high proportion of things I am interested in. And having people like Persi
to talk to is an added bonus.

There was supposed to be transport for our bags, but I sat down and fell into
conversation with various people including Persi and Ben and missed my chance.
At 11:30 Cheryl finished her work with Simon Guest, and we agreed to have
lunch and work afterwards.

After lunch I went to the reception to check out and leave my bag. I had
thought that we were meeting there, so waited for a while. While there, I
was entertained by an extraordinary crow. It sat in a pine tree and uttered
repeated calls in a recognisably musical monotone on the note of G. Then
it flew to a neighbouring tree, which seemed to extend its repertoire, to
a more crow-like caw and also a throaty rattle.

When Cheryl didn't show up, I remembered that she had suggested meeting
in the lounge in Corbett Hall, when we had planned to do it before lunch.
So I went back there and couldn't find her. I found Chris Parker, who 
hadn't seen her, so I went back to reception. A little while later Chris 
showed up, saying that Cheryl was now in Corbett Hall. So I went back, and 
we finally met up.

We sat in the lounge and talked about what to do with our paper. She also
told me about a problem posed to her by a number theorist. Given a transitive
group G, the problem is to minimize the sum of subdegrees for which the 
corresponding double cosets generate G. (This isn't quite how she stated it,
but I think a further formulation is helpful: find the minimum valency of a
G-invariant connected digraph.)

She had been going to walk with Peter and Sylvia, but they had now gone, so
she agreed to come with me; we would walk as far up Mt Rundle as we could do
in the time available. While I waited at the door for her, two chambermaids
came in. I told them how much I had enjoyed my stay. One of them asked me
where I was from; I said "London, England." She asked what language they
spoke there, and was dumbfounded when I said "English"; she thought that
English came from America...

We walked down the hill beside the river, with views of the Bow Falls, and
a really scary sign telling you not to walk on a trail at the top of the 
cliffs (so you can't get a really good view of the falls). So we walked down
the road, finding a river path after a while, crossed over the only bridge, 
walked back on the other side (with better, lower-level views of the falls),
across a bridge over Spray River, and after walking along the road by the 
golf course for a while we found the start of the trail.

It soon started climbing, going almost straight up the sloping face of the
mountain. There were nice woods, with Indian paintbrush and some 
waxy-looking flower that turned out to be white camas, as well as various 
fungi and a sponge-like moss. We hoped to get above the treeline but the 
clock beat us; we had to turn back at about 1800 metres. We talked about 
many things, including the struggles of the mathematicians in Australia with 
the bureaucrats running the research assessment there.

On the way back, we saw people paddling in the beautiful clear water of the
Bow River. I was so tempted to take off my boots and go in, but time didn't
permit. We went on, and back up the hill, where I retrieved my bag from the
reception desk and had only a short wait for the bus.

I was the only passenger boarding at the Banff Centre, or indeed in Banff;
there was one more passenger booked from Canmore, so the very good-natured
driver phoned her up to say he was running a bit ahead of time, was that 
OK with her? 

The bus rolled on down the valley between the mountains. Clouds were beginning
to spill over the range on our right, and mysterious shafts of light
penetrated the gloom; on the other side there was blue sky with only some
high cirrus cloud. Then back through the hills and blue wildflower meadows,
the cattle country, the cultivation, and finally the outskirts of Calgary.

It is not much of an exaggeration to say that half the trip is the journey
from Banff to Calgary, and the other half is a trek through suburban Calgary;
but finally we were at the airport, a quarter of an hour early. I went to the
bathroom, where I changed my underwear and socks, shaved and brushed my 
teeth one last time; then I asked about the flight at the check-in desk 
(no queue!) and got a gate number.

Going through security I had a bad moment. "Any liquids?" "No". "Any large
electronics?" "Yes, a netbook." "Put it in the bin." It turned out that he
meant the tray that goes through the X-ray machine, not the trash can where
excess liquid goes... Maybe it is Canada where they don't speak English.

I had actually gone into Zone A, because the security check at Zone B was
closed. There were places to eat in that part of the airport, but after a
long trek through a narrow winding corridor to Zone B, there were only a
couple of tiny snack bars, all closed. It will be quite a while before I
get to eat!

We started boarding a few minutes early, pushed back right on time, and
taxied out to the runway under an extraordinary orange sky, with a thin
crescent moon sinking into the murk. The woman who was seated beside me
had gone to a spare seat somewhere else in the plane, giving me two seats
to spread out my things on.

Dinner came promptly and the entertainment system didn't work, so there was
nothing for it but to go to sleep.

