24 July 2009

I woke up and did the first job (checking in) before breakfast. It was
simple enough: find Air Canada with Google, go to "check-in", type in my
booking number, tick a few boxes, hit "print". Then I had to get dressed
to go next door to the reading room to pick up the boarding pass from
the printer.

I heard a rather worrying story from Katrin Tent at breakfast, concerning
the LMS. She has had three papers recently mutilated by copy-editors. In
one case, they had added her husband's name as an author on the paper;
and they had preceded a list of conditions by the phrase "The following
conditions are equivalent:". Yesterday, walking up Tunnel Mountain, Ben
had told me a similar (but not quite so drastic) tale. Should I write
to Kenneth Falconer about it?

At breakfast, I realised that I would be back in Britain in 24 hours if
nothing went wrong. There were light clouds in the sky. Coming back, I
met Cheryl, who wants to talk about the paper this afternoon - there goes
my chance for a last walk.

I finished my packing and went over to the lecture room. The conference
finished with two absolutely splendid talks by Ben Steinberg and Peter
Neumann, and then Persi thanked the organisers. He said that he had heard
many people saying this was one of the best conferences ever. As far as I
am concerned, it had a very high proportion of excellent talks, and a very
high proportion of things I am interested in. And having people like Persi
to talk to is an added bonus.

There was supposed to be transport for our bags, but I sat down and fell into
conversation with various people including Persi and Ben and missed my chance.
At 11:30 Cheryl finished her work with Simon Guest, and we agreed to have
lunch and work afterwards.

After lunch I went to the reception to check out and leave my bag. I had
thought that we were meeting there, so waited for a while; when Cheryl didn't
show up, I remembered that she had suggested meeting in the lounge in Corbett
Hall, when we had planned to do it before lunch. So I went back there and
couldn't find her. I fund Chris Parker, who hadn't seen her, so I went back
to reception. A little while later Chris showed up, saying that Cheryl was
now in Corbett Hall. So I went back, and we finally met up.

We sat in the lounge and talked about what to do with our paper. She also
told me about a problem posed to her by a number theorist. Given a transitive
group G, the problem is to minimize the sum of subdegrees for which the 
corresponding double cosets generate G. (This isn't quite how she stated it,
but I think a further formulation is helpful: find the minimum valency of a
G-invariant connected digraph.)

She had been going to walk with Peter and Sylvia, but they had now gone, so
she agreed to come with me; we would walk as far up Mt Rundle as we could do
in the time available. While I waited at the door for her, two chambermaids
came in. I told them how much I had enjoyed my stay. One of them asked me
where I was from; I said "London, England." She asked what language they
spoke there, and was dumbfounded when I said "English"; she thought that
English came from America...

We walked down the hill beside the river, with views
of the Bow Falls, and a really scary sign telling you not to walk on a trail
at the top of the cliffs. So we walked down the road, finding a river path
after a while, crossed over the only bridge, walked back on the other side
(with better, lower-level views of the falls), across a bridge over Spray
River, and after walking along the road by the golf course for a while
we found the start of the trail.

It soon started climbing, going almost straight up the sloping face of the
mountain. There were nice woods, with Indian paintbrush ad some waxy-looking
flower that I will have to look up, as well as various fungi and a sponge-like
moss. We hoped to get above the treeline but the clock beat us; we had to
turn back at about 1800 metres. We talked about many things including the
struggles of the mathematicians in Australia with the bureaucrats running
the research assessment there.

On the way back, we saw people paddling in the beautiful clear water of the
Bow River. I was so tempted to take off my boots and go in, but time didn't
permit. We went on, and back up the hill, where I retrieved my bag from the
reception desk and had only a short wait for the bus.

I was the only passenger boarding at the Banff Centre, or indeed in Banff;
there was one more passenger booked from Canmore, so the very good-natured
driver phoned her up to say he was running a bit ahead of time, was that 
OK with her? 

The bus rolled on down the valley between the mountains. Clouds were beginning
to spill over the range on our right, and mysterious shafts of light
penetrated the gloom; on the other side there was blue sky with only some
high cirrus cloud. Then back through the hills and blue wildflower meadows,
the cattle country, the cultivation, and finally the outskirts of Calgary.

It is not much of an exaggeration to say that half the trip is the journey
from Banff to Calgary, and the other half is a trek through suburban Calgary;
but finally we were at the airport, a quarter of an hour early. I went to the
bathroom where I changed my underwear and socks, shaved and brushed my teeth
one last time; then I asked about the flight at the check-in desk (no queue!)
and got a gate number.

Going through security I had a bad moment. "Any liquids?" "No". "Any large
electronics?" "Yes, a netbook." "Put it in the bin." It turned out that he
meant the tray that goes through the X-ray machine, not the trash can where
excess liquid goes... Maybe it is Canada where they don't speak English.

I had actually gone into Zone A, because the security check at Zone B was
closed. There were places to eat in that part of the airport, but after a
long trek through a narrow winding corridor to Zone B, there were only a
couple of tiny snack bars, all closed. It will be quite a while before I
get to eat!

We started boarding a few minutes early, pushed back right on time, and
taxied out to the runway under an extraordinary orange sky, with a thin
crescent moon sinking into the murk. The woman who was seated behind me
had gone to a spare seat somewhere else in the plane, giving me two seats
to spread out my things on.

Dinner came promptly and the entertainment system didn't work, so there was
nothing for it but to go to sleep.

