19 July 2009

Getting underway took several attempts since I first wanted to have the
limo schedule at Calgary to hand and then I realised I had forgotten my hat.

The District Line is not running east of Aldgate East, so I had a fair walk
on setting out. The sky was cloudy but the sun was shining as I walked down
through a very uncrowded Whitechapel. There was some wait for the tube,
but eventually it came and I got a seat.

When we emerged into the daylight again at Barons Court, it had been raining;
the tracks were wet. The second tube to come took me to Heathrow. Since I
had checked in online, I went to the departure gate. But the scanner wouldn't
read my boarding pass, so they sent me back downstairs to have another one
printed out. That, fortunately, worked OK.

I sat in the departure lounge and worked on a new chapter for my counting
notes (on permanents, SDRs, and Latin squares) until the gate was announced.
At the gate, they didn't like my passport; the picture was not printed with
waterproof ink, and has smudged from a bit of water getting into it in
Galway. (What a relief that I didn't spend a lot of money getting a UK
resident stamp put into it!) But they accepted my old passport as ID and
let me in.

The flight was late leaving. They announced that this was caused by delay to
the incoming plane, and that we would be boarding in five or ten minutes.
Fifteen minutes later they repeated this announcement, word for word. But
the second time it was actually correct. Then, when we were ready to go,
the pilot was told by air traffic control that there was a further fifteen
minutes' delay. We messed around on the tarmac for quite a long time, and
in the end were almost an hour late leaving. There is now almost no chance
of catching the limo; I should have booked a later one.

On taking off, there was a lot of turbulence, so they didn't turn off the
seat belt sign for quite a while. I listened to "Highway 61 revisited" for
a while, until lunch came. The flight data system is not working so I cannot
get updates on our position or even find out for sure how many hours Calgary
is behind London (I think it is seven).

After lunch and coffee, I got the white toy out and typed up the chapter I
have written. I am not sure yet how much to say about Falikman's proof of the
van der Waerden conjecture, so I have deferred that decision and written up
the rest.

Then I read for a while (travel diaries, then a book), and listened to
music, while time passed. None of the other music compared to Bob Dylan, so
after a while I went back to Highway 61. Just three tracks in, we were
interrupted by an announcement that we were 35 minutes from Calgary, the
ordeal almost over.

Coming down into Calgary, we went through some quite bad turbulence; they
were having a storm. (The runways were wet when we landed.) A passenger
a few rows in front of me was airsick, and the disagreeable smell spread
through the cabin. But finally we were down, just 35 minutes late. Customs
and immigration took only ten minutes.

I had a shock when I looked at the limo receipt; I had mistakenly booked
for 2:30 instead of 4:30. But the girl had adjusted the bookings and told
me everything was fine, I should come back to the desk five minutes before
departure, and I should go to the loo since it is a two-hour journey.

There were five of us on the minibus, all going to the Banff Centre. A family
of father, mother and six-year-old boy from Los Angeles, the parents doing
some art thing at the Banff festival; a girl frm Philadelphia who plays the
trumpet and is teaching some classes there; and me. The little boy reads a
series of comic books called "Captain Underpants", which the American girl
had heard of. We chatted for a while and then fell to sleeping or watching
the scenery.

Calgary is not such a pleasant town. Set in saucer-like basins separated by
ridges, it sprawls a long way, the suburbs consisting of patches of identical
houses separated by wide expanses of mown grass which seems not to be used
for anything. The whole place has a raw look, with no mature trees. But from
the tops of the ridges we could get a glimpse of jagged mountains in the
distance. The only thing of note was a large bird of prey in the far distance.

Eventually we turned west on the highway and Calgary fell behind. At first
the ground was fairly flat with some cultivation. Then it became more
undulating, and very green, and cattle replaced crops. The undulations
became full-scale hills, with more trees (pine, and some with broad shiny
leaves), and steep gullies ran down. By th roadside were increasing numbers
of wildflowers, including some striking blue ones. All the time the mountains
were drawing nearer, until after an hour we reached them.

They were as rugged as they had looked from a distance, with craggy cliffs
riven by crevices, dangerous-looking scree slopes, and clear strata at
vetiginous angles or violently twisted. But we didn't have to
climb them; the road ran through a valley with a fast-flowing river and
an industrial town. The panorama of mountains changed as we proceeded; one
view of a mountain standing alone made us all catch our breath.

After another half hour we reached the entrance to the Banff National Park,
which has a lower speed limit on the highway. Signs warned of wildlife on the
highway, though we didn't see any. (Before the park, they had warned of
pedestrians on the highway.) Before long we turned off, drove through Banff
town (it has a "Swiss village") and round the back streets to the Banff
Centre, where the driver let us off.

I read my instructions, which hinted that I should be somewhere different
from the main reception. But I went in to reception anyway, and it was the
right place. I got my key, my room card, a map, and rather complicated
directions for getting to the building where I am staying (there is a large
building site between). Chipmunks (maybe) scampered away across a lawn as
I passed.

I dumped my bats in my room found my way to the common room where my 
badge and computer account details were. But the notice said that the entry
code to the room had been emailed to me. Fortuately I had printed out this
email, so on my second try I got the badge and account.

Then I went over to dinner. They swipe your card at the door (it knows who
you are) and then you are in and take what you like. I took a bowl of soup
and found my way to the BIRS tables, and many old friends having dinner.
At the first tabe I reached, Persi invited me to sit down in a place which
had just been vacated. Opposite him was Ben Steinberg, whom I met now for
the first time, despite having exchanged many emails.

I ate and had a long conversation, first with Persi, then with Ben and Peter
Neumann who came by. I am told it stays light very late here at this time of
year, but thought I should try to sleep at some point before my body thinks
it is morning and time to get up. (The time difference was, indeed, seven
hours).

Coming out of the dining room, we saw a small elk with a fine set of antlers
eating the flowers in a flower pot outside the building.

Back home I tried the computer and found it worked; but I can't connect
the white toy, and can't find a USB port on the SUN terminal.

