22 July 2009

I slept much more soundly, and was a bit late for breakfast (partly because
I read my email and then found a very amusing account of Mayor's Question
Time on London Reconnections). Parts of my talk were running in my head
over breakfast. As usual I have too much material, but the bits that will
probably be cut are actually some of the most interesting, showing the
power of this approach.

I did take a little time to start writing an account, possibly destined
for Strider. There is a story to tell, given yesterday's business.

But then the drawback of having two rooms sharing a bathroom became clear;
my apartment-mate went in for a long session. I had to take a long walk to
the lecture building to clean my teeth!

My talk went very well. I had 45 minutes, so I had to prune ruthlessly; but
I managed to tell a story, make propoganda for both monoids and graphs, and
I even got a cheer from Persi when I said that we have to solve some problems
even if they are NP-hard. Afterwards there were a couple of interesting
suggestions from various people including Peter Neumann, who made the 
conjecture that any primitive group and any non-uniform map generate a
synchronizing monoid, and also suggested a possible source of affine examples.

Then Rob Wilson talked about his construction of the large Ree groups. Lovely
stuff, and he makes it all look so easy. At the end, several members of the
audience came out as secret Ree-group constructors. After the breakk, Pham
Tiep talked about the problem of classifying representations which remain
irreducible on restriction to a proper subgroup.

Jan announced that the walk would involve driving to the bottom of the
road up to Sunshine Village and catching the bus up the hill, at a cost
of 25 dollars per person. I said I would come but reserved the right not
to go on the bus. Ruth was good enough to make me a copy of the map. I
tried gently to persuade someone to come with me, but failed (maybe just
as well - I ended up walking 21km in less than four hours, with 700m 
difference between the highest and lowest point).

We were divided up among the available cars (Peter and Sylvia Neumann took
Simon Blackburn and me) and drove down the highway a bit and then off a side
road up a little valley to the huge car park and gondola station. (Sunshine
Village exists for skiing; it claims to have snow for nine months of the
year.) On the way we passed a big herd of wild goats. They were still there
when we returned home; I noticed that some of them were licking the road 
surface in a small lay-by; presumably they salt the roads in winter and
some of the salt stays there.

At the car park, where the bus was waiting, I went into the little shop in
search of information, and picked up a leaflet about the wildflowers. There
was also a notice on a board about "grizzly activity" reported in Healy and
Simpson passes. This was not to scare people off, rather the reverse; you
were encouraged to join an expedition to see the grizzlies. In the event, I
saw no sign of any bears, but on the way down the dusty road I did meet two
people with bells on their boots to scare the bears away.

The others got into the bus and set off; I found the trail and headed
off along it. At first we went in almot the same direction, the trail just
below the dusty gravel road - the bus driver told the party that sooner or
later I would have to scramble up to the road. But the path along Healy Creek
soon turned off while the road switchbacked up the hill.

It was a lovely forest path with a huge cliff rising on the other side of the
valley. Wildflowers grew beside the path, most of which I was able to
identify from the leaflet, but a very common one with four curved and pointed
petals was not listed - later I looked it up and found it to be bunchberry.
The path climbed and crossed a lovely clear stream. A young hiker was sitting
by the stream and explained to me that he had got ahead of his party. Sure
enough, I soon found a large group of kids, and told the adult that I had
seen one of his group.

After a while the path levelled off in an alpine meadow with a discreet 
camping site. I had decided to take a slightly less direct route to the 
start of the Simpson Pass trail; it turned out to involve a much stiffer
climb. (The contour lines on maps of the Rockies are at 50 metre intervals,
so maps can be a bit misleading at first glance.) Nearing the top, I heard
the noise of a helicopter echoing from the surrounding mountains; just as
I stepped out from the trees, it was flying away.

I was now in competely different country, a flatter area with boggy lakes
nd stunning views of the mountains and a different selection of wildflowers.
Soon I came to a couple of young people by a stream; they turned out to be
park workers putting in stepping stones. It is possible that the helicopter
was dropping them off for their afternoon's work. Then I met a hiker who
stopped to talk. Just as he complained about the heat, a cooling breeze 
sprang up.

A very steep descent brought me to an open valley and the start of the Simpson
Pass trail. After a short climb, the trail came to the bottom of a huge
crumbling cliff, which had spilt a huge pile of stones and rubble along its
base, stretching out nearly to the trail in places. From the map I saw that
the Alberta-BC border runs along the top of the cliff; presumably, like the
Queensland-NSW border, the surveyors were told to follow the top of the ridge.

At the end of the ridge, the path climbed gently to a pass, and I thought I
was over, but not so. It crossed a valley and climbed the other side, with
the steepest climb of the whole walk. Just before the real summit, it went
round a cwm in which snow was lying in full sunlight (but on the shady side,
so presumably only in sun for a few hours a day.) The top brought a view of
a chain of huge bare mountains rising to almost 3000m. As I walked down the
other side, a cloud shadow crossed one of the mountain flanks like a giant
butterfly. The wildflowers here were the best yet.

The path led down a ski run to Sunshine Village, with one barn-like
accommodation block and the top of the gondola and the bottoms of a couple
of chairlifts. I headed down the dusty road with spectacular views of
mountains all around. Several cars came by kicking up the dust, then a water
truck spraying the road (and me). It made more dust than any of the others,
but afterwards things were not so bad. The road went on down; I could see
the trail I had taken earlier; and on the dot of 5:45, the scheduled meeting
time, I walked into the car park. The bar was closed, but I had a bottle of
water left, so I drank that, while checking the wildflowers. Among other things
I had seen lots of Indian paintbrush, purple fleabane (the orange and purple
daisies), glacier lily (well past its best), alpine forget-me-not, white
dryad, white globe flower, heart-leaf arnica, yellow fleabane, heather,
common stonecrop, and wild strawberry (no fruit yet, sadly).

There had been relatively few birds. Apart from some unidentified small ones,
I had only seen a raven with something in its beak. But there were birds in
the trees, making a lovely melodious whistling, in some places.

Soon the bus arrived, and we got into cars for the trip back.

Most of the others went to have showers, but I decided to eat first, since we
were on that side of the campus. After dinner, I soaked for a while; I am
remarkably un-stiff after quite a demanding walk. Then I took a beer and went
and sat on the porch. After a while Peter joined me, and then Ben, and the
talk fell to synchronization. On the walk I had checked Peter's affine
construction and found an even better variant (which he must really have
known about); and I trumped his conjecture about non-uniform maps always
synchronizing a primitive group with an even stronger conjecture that the
only maps that don't synchronize are maps onto the core of some G-invariant
graph.

While we were sitting there, an elk came and sat down under a tree, allowing
all the passers-by to inspect it. Jan, Ruth and Sylvia decided to jump into
a car and drive off to Lake Minnewanka where a moose had been seen yesterday.
(They didn't see it, but they saw a very fine sunset.)

Once the mosquitoes started biting, we went in to the common room, and tried
ineffectively, to prove one or other of these conjectures. By 10:30 we were
all tired and went to bed to sleep on them instead.

