20 July 2009

I woke several times in the night, but had no trouble getting back to sleep.
Twice I heard trains rumbling past somewhere in the distance, whistling a
minor chord rather than the FAB chord (major third and tone) of the
Quebec trains.

Eventually I realised I was wide awake so I got up and read my email. I am
in an apartment with two rooms sharing a bathroom; I don't know who is in
the other one, but whoever it is made quite a lot of clattering round locking
and unlocking doors last night, and at one point there was a terrific crash.
A notice in my room says that the thermostat is in the neighbouring bedroom,
so presumably this is intended as a family apartment. Anyway, I showered
quite early to avoid conflict over the bathroom.

I went early to breakfast. The Banff Centre caters for a lot of arty things
(some of which the people on the bus yesterday were going to), with mathematics
as just the small change; and the huge new building will dwarf the rest of 
the site. But it made for some interesting photographs of the mountains t
through tthe building work. At breakfast, I found Persi, John van Bon, and
Richard Weiss. Later Katrin Tent and Martin Ziegler came, then Bob Guralnick
and his wife who have just driven from Princeton. Other friends all around
on other tables. Very nice breakfast, though I was somewhat restrained.

After that, it was almost time for the opening of the conference. Brenda,
the BIRS person, told us a few things, including the fact that there is a
computer manual in our desk drawer. She also said that this is the first
week of good weather in Banff all year.

Gary Seitz gave the first talk, announcing his result with Martin Liebeck 
(long coming) about classes and centralisers of unipotent elements in 
algebraic groups. Then John Shareshian and Michael Aschbacher talked about 
finding a lattice which is not an interval in a subgroup lattice of any finite 
group. The classical candidate is the n-point line; Michael concentrated on 
this (and has reduced it to two problems about almost simple groups) while 
John seemed to prefer taking a slightly more complicated type of lattice.

At coffee time I discussed with Brenda the possibility of a walk around
Sulphur Mountain on the Sundance trail for the free afternoon. I do not
want to spend hald the time in a car going to Lake Louise, which seems
to be the popular alternative.

At lunch I fell into a discussion with Persi and Ben, which after a while
came round to the order of the arguments in a wreath product, and hence to
actions on the left or the right. On the way to lunch, we had discussed the
little animals on the grass; Ben, the only Canadian present, was not sure
what they are: too big for chipmunks, and the wrong sort of tail for squirrels.

After lunch they had put on a campus tour but I decided to go for a walk
instead. I decided to see how far up the Tunnel Mountain trail I could get
if I were to get back in time for the conference photo at 2.

The distant views were stunning, and there were quite a lot of wildflowers
too: harebells, purple and orange daisies, stonecrop, and a grey-leafed shrub
with yellow flowers, were the most common. I reached the ridge, which gives
astonishing views of the next bit of the river valley and the other side of
Mt Rundle. I had to turn back just before the summit, having had the best
part, I'm sure.

Before the photo, Brenda appeared with a map and some bad news: the Sundance
Trail is closed from April to October. I will have to find something else to
do: I am sure I want to do a serious walk!

The photo was taken by the IT person and was very quick and painless, and
then we had a lovely talk by Persi about his encounters with Gelfand pairs
(with an appropriate story from probability or statistics to illustrate
each one, including a story from Piaget. 

After tea we reassembled for the last three talks. Just before the first,
Bill Kantor gave me the news that Bob Liebler has just died, on a hike, it
seems. He didn't feel too good, and told his companion to go on ahead, and
was not seen alive after that.

The last three talks were a mixed bag; the one most interesting to me,
because of the project with Robert, was Akos Seress' talk about distinguising
number. Having done primitive groups completely, he is now doing what he
calls "two-step imprimitive groups", but it is far from complete. I think
Robert and I are absolved from the burden of trying to survey this.

When the talks ended,  went back to my room to dump my things, and discovered
who my mystery neighbour is; it is Tim Burness. At dinner I ate with Bill and
Phyllis Kantor. Phyllis had walked to the Hoodoos and thoroughly recommended it.

After dinner I went back to my room. I tried to look up Sundance Pass on 
Google but could find no information. I downloaded the conference photo, and 
also transferred my day's photos from the camera onto the white toy and
wrote up my diary. The computer manual tells me where the USB port is - in
a very inaccessible place where you need tiny fingers to get it in and out
and run the risk of dislodging the keyboard and mouse leads. So I uploaded
yesterday's diary and emailed it to Ro. There is a paper from Tatiana which
I have to read, and the conference photo is on the web.

Then I went out to sit on the porch. I wanted to think about my talk and
about a theorem of Ken Johnson that Persi quoted in his talk (that the 
permutation group generated by the left and right multiplications in a 
quasigroup is multiplicity-free), but soon Peter Neumann came by, and gradually
quite a large crowd accumulated and a couple of bottles of wine appeared.
We sat there until the mosquitoes drove us in. The others went to the
common room to continue, but I decided it was my bedtime.


